REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5. RURAL POLICY AREAS 5.01 Regional Overview The Rural Policy Areas in the Region cover approximately 890 square kilometres, which accounts for about 23% of the total land area in the Region. They include a variety of land forms, the major components of which being the foothills of the Dandenong Ranges and the valleys and surrounding foothills of the Yarra and Little YarraRivers andtheirtributaries. Rural Policy Areas support a wide variety of land uses, including intensive and broadscale agricultural activities, forestry, recreation and tourism and a varietyof ‘rural’ lifestyles, ranging from isolated farm houses to rural settlements. The major resources of these policy areas, apart from its people, are its climate, soils, water, flora and fauna andlandscapes. Rural landscapes are one of the Region's greatest attributes and assets. The combination of open valleys with rising foothills, framed by strong vertical elements of surrounding mountains and major ranges rising abruptly from the river flats, make this area one of themost attractiveandpleasant visual environments intheState. A combination of mild climate, high and well distributed rainfall and a variety of good soils has led to the establishment of many and varied agricultural activities, some of whichareofregional andStateimportance. There are persistent and often conflicting land use pressures and demands being placed on the natural resources of the Rural Policy Areas. Many past land use demands have resulted in dramatic modification of the natural environment. Current rural land use demands, if not managed and controlled sensitively, could result in further alienation of productive agricultural land and deterioration and/or loss of environmental and landscapevalues. Policies for Rural land based on further development and strengthening of the policies whichhavebeeninplacesincetheapproval oftheRegional StrategyPlanin1982. 5.02 Regional Goals and Objectives The regional goal for Rural Policy Areas is to ensure that rural land in the Region is protected and maintained for agricultural and rural activities and that rural landscapes are protected, maintained and where necessary improved, for the benefit of the present andfuturegenerations. 5.03 Regional Objectives Theregional objectives forRural PolicyAreas areto,whereappropriate,ensure:  the continuation of rural land uses primarilyforfarmingpurposes, andotheruses compatiblewithfarming; 24. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  the use and management of land in a manner that is sustainable and conducive to themaintenanceoffarmingoptions andopportunities inthefuture;  the protection and conservation of soils as an essential and irreplaceable natural resource;  the protection and management of native vegetation for its intrinsic values, as a fauna habitat and a valuable visual component of the rural landscape, and for its value for soil conservation, maintenance of water yields and quality and contributiontowards reducingtheGreenhouseEffect;  that all land use and development are compatible with the maintenance of rural landscapes, characterandatmosphere;  that all land use and management is carried out in a manner compatible with maintenance and improvement of water qualityand yields; and to ensure that the values identified on adjacent public and other land are not degraded by the off- siteeffects from rural land;  the protection, maintenance and enhancement of watercourses, wetlands, floodplains and drainage systems as essential components of water resource management andlandscapeandfaunal corridors as important aquatichabitat;  the rehabilitation of degraded watercourses and re-establishment of native riparianvegetationalongwatercourses andotherareas;  that the built environment, such as houses, buildings, structures, roads and other infrastructure, are sited and designed in a manner that complements the natural environment,and  the establishment of appropriate buffers between agricultural/rural and urban areas, to enable the exercising without conflict, of the right of farmers to farm theirland. 5.04 Rural Policy Areas - Description and Primary Purposes Thelocationandextent ofall Rural PolicyAreas is shownon Map Series 1. Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Areas Overview The Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Area covers the Silvan and Monbulk areas, and is used extensively for intensive agriculture and cropping, with the main activities being productionofcut flowers, nurserystock,vegetables, bulbs, fruit andberries. Rural residential and urban related demands are particularlystrongin this areaandifnot managedproperly,will continueas threats tothearea's agricultural productivity. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Intensive Agriculture 1 Policy Areas is to protect, maintain and enhance the productive resources of the red soil areas, and to encourage its 25. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS use for intensive agricultural purposes, and where necessary to discourage the use of land for non agricultural purposes, while recognising the importance of the landscape values. Intensive Agricultural 2 Policy Areas Overview The Intensive Agricultural 2 Policy Area generally comprises red soil areas at Hoddles Creek. This Policy Area differs from Intensive Agriculture 1 through the productivity of soils being lower, because of generally lower natural fertility, shortages ofwaterinsomeareas andcolderclimates, resultinginashortergrowingseason. Berries and vegetables are the main crop, with some fruit production. In recent years the growingofgrapevines intheHoddles Creekareahas gainedsomeprominence. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Intensive Agriculture 2 Policy Area is to protect, maintain and enhance the red soil areas as a resource and to encourage the use of this land for broadscale intensive agricultural purposes, and where necessary, to discourage theuseoflandfornonagricultural purposes, whileprotectingthelandscapevalues. Rural 1 Policy Areas Overview The Rural 1 Policy Area covers an area constituting the major agricultural resource in the Region. This PolicyArea generallyfollows the valleys of the Yarra and Little Yarra Rivers andsomeoftheirtributaries. The predominant land use is grazing. Other agricultural and rural activities include mixed farming and some part time farming, with an increasing presence of more intensiveagricultural activities suchas fruit andvegetablegrowingandviticulture. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural 1 Policy Areas is to maintain and protect its soils and water resources for a variety of broadscale agricultural and rural activities, to control land use and land management activities in a manner conducive to the maintenance of landscape character, and to protect and enhance the remaining areas of nativevegetation,protect thenativefaunaandmaintainandimprovewaterquality. Rural 2 Policy Areas Overview The Rural 2 Policy Area covers an area generally located in the eastern parts of the Region, on more undulating and steeper slopes at higher altitudes. It has lower agricultural values than the Rural 1 Policy Areas. The predominant land use is grazing, withsomepart timefarmingandviticulture. Primary Purpose 26. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS The primary purpose of the Rural 2 Policy Areas is to maintain and protect its soil and water resources for a variety of broadscale agricultural and rural activities and to control land use and land management activities, in a manner conducive to maintenance of landscape character, to protect and enhance the remaining areas of native vegetation, protect thenativefauna,andmaintainandimprovewaterquality. Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area Overview The Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area generally comprises the land located between the Lysterfield Lake Park and Cardinia Reservoirandextendingnortheasterlytoincludethe rural portions ofMonbulkandtheeasternfoothills oftheDandenongRanges. Due to past subdivision of land in this area, the majorityof lots are in parcels of about 8 hectares. Soils are relatively poor, water scarce and the main agricultural activities are confined to part time farming, with some intensiveagricultural activities intheMonbulk area. The Policy Area contains some significant landscapes, such as the Cotswold Valleyand parts of Menzies Creek Valley, which are landscapes "classified" and "recorded" by the National Trust. Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural Landscape 1 Policy Areas is toprovideforarange of farming uses and activities (including part time farming) compatible with land suitability, capability and subdivision patterns, to protect and maintain the remaining native vegetation, wildlife, water quality and to maintain and enhance landscape value andcharacter. Rural Landscape 2 Policy Area Overview The Rural Landscape 2 Policy Area includes land alongthe Yarra River and at Seville and in the Burleigh Hills, as well as small areas in the Macclesfield, Lysterfield and Monbulk areas. Main agricultural activities are grazing, mixed farming, part time farmingandinsomeareas, fruit andberryproduction. As in the Rural Landscape 1 Policy Area, the land in this Policy Area has been extensively subdivided. The lots however are generally larger than in Rural Landscape 1,withthemost commonsizebeingabout 16hectares. This Policy Area also contains significant landscapes, with areas such as Yellingbo Creek having National Trust "classified" status and the Menzies Creek having "recorded"status. 27. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Rural Landscape 2 Policy Areas is toprovideforarange of farming uses and activities (including part time farming) compatible with land suitability, capability and subdivision patterns, to protect and maintain the remaining native vegetation, wildlife, water quality and to maintain and enhance landscape value andcharacter. Rural Conservation Policy Areas Overview The Rural Conservation Policy Area covers generally steep and forested land. It includes the Warramate Hills, parts of Mt. Donna Buang Range and Pauls Range and theareas southofYarraJunction,Beenak,GladysdaleandWarburton. Only a small proportion of this Policy Area has been cleared in the past. Land uses in this PolicyAreaincludelimitedgrazingandpart timefarming,andtimberharvesting. Most land in this Policy Area is significant environmentally, for its flora, fauna, water protection and for its significant landscape values. The Warramate Hills and Mt. Donna Buang Range are National Trust "classified" landscapes. The Little Yarra River and its environs is a"recorded"landscape. Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the Rural Conservation Policy Areas is to protect and maintain native vegetation for its intrinsic value and for its value as a wildlife habitat, to protect landscape values and quality and to ensure that any land use is carried out in a mannercompatiblewiththemaintenanceofwaterquality. 5.05 Threats to the Primary Purposes of Rural Policy Areas The major threats to the primary purposes of Rural Policy Areas, particularly the objectiveofprovidingforthecontinuationofagricultural purposes, are:  thedemandforrural residential living;  thepressures forfurthersubdivision;  uses and developments not compatible with the protection and maintenance of rural landscapes; and  theinappropriateremoval ofnativevegetation. Policies for land use and management in Rural Policy Areas 5.06 Land use Land uses must be compatible with the regional goals, the regional objectives for rural land,andwiththeprimarypurposeforeachRural PolicyArea. 28. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5.07 Construction of buildings The construction of buildings (including houses and farm buildings) in Rural Policy Areas must be carried out in a manner that is compatible with the maintenance of rural and agricultural land uses, protection and, where possible, enhancement of landscape values, water resources, indigenous flora and fauna (and their habitat) and the provision ofacceptablestandards ofresidential health,safetyandamenity. Development within Rural Policy Areas may only occur on land (within a designated development envelope)which:  is not subject to excessive slopes (that is a slope greater than 20%), without proper regard being given to appropriate measures to ensure that soil erosion does not occur;  is not within a floodplain management area (except as allowed under Policy 10.02);  if subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybe used for controlled and limiteddevelopment;  is not within an area identified as having a high risk from wildfire, unless it has been shown that appropriate measures have been undertaken, to provide an acceptablelevel ofprotectiontothebuildingfrom wildfirerisk;  is of sufficient size, should there be no reticulated sewerage to which the building can connected, to enable proper on-site treatment of all wastes generated in the building and the disposal on-site of the effluent from the treatment;  enables all buildings and their waste treatment and effluent disposal means tobe located away from watercourses (by at least 30m), such that water quality is not adversely affected and stream and watercourse vegetation is protected from disturbance;  enables proper consideration to be given to the type of construction (external materials in particular) andthelocationofthebuildings andtheirancillaryworks (such as driveways and access roads), in a manner that avoids intrusion into the surrounding landscape, and which provides opportunities for protecting remnant indigenous vegetationandnatural habitat; and  demonstrates that any house or building requiring utility services are able to be provided with such services in a manner that will not have an adverse impact on theenvironment orlandscapeofthearea. 5.08 Tenement provisions Within Rural Policy Areas a tenement holding control must be introduced (or maintained) in the former Shires of Sherbrooke and Lillydale, so that development of a housewill onlyoccuronalot orparcel oflandwhichsatisfies oneofthefollowing:  is part of a tenement holding and is in excess of 4 ha. in area, except in the IntensiveAgriculture1PolicyAreawhereit must beinexcess of2ha;  was created in accordance with an approved Planning Scheme or Interim Development Order; 29. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  consists oftheconsolidationofall parcels and/orlots withinatenement holding;  is a lot which existed as a separate tenement holding on the date specified in the relevant ShirePlanningScheme; or 5.09 Tenement anomaly provisions Despite the requirement for tenement provisions, a planning scheme may modify the tenement provisions as theyapplytospecificlots, providedthat it is demonstratedthat:  The modification will not prejudicetheprimarypurposeofthepolicyareawithin which the lots occur and that the wider objectives of tenement controls for the policy area are protected from incremental erosion and are maintained as a legitimate means of protecting the areas identified from inappropriate development.  Services such as constructed roads, reticulated water supply and reticulated sewerage are available, without additional substantial costs to Council and servicing authorities and the provision of these and other utility services will haveminimal impact ontheenvironment orlandscapeofthearea.  Where reticulated sewerage is not available, the site must be of sufficient size to enableproperon-sitetreatment anddisposal ofall wastes.  Where the land is an area identified as having a high risk of wildfire hazard, appropriate building design measures will be required to be undertaken to provideanacceptablelevel ofprotection.  Development will not jeopardise the maintenance of any Site of Natural SignificanceorSiteofCultural significance.  There will be no detriment to the ecology of any stream or watercourse on or nearthesite,byvirtueoftheadditional development occurring.  The additional development can be considered to be infill in an area which is substantiallybuilt up.  The land is not subject to constraints to development, such as land instability, land liable to floodingor land withslopes of20%orgreater(unless whereslopes are greater than 20%, information has been provided that demonstrates that soil erosion will be minimised, landscape characteristics are protected or enhanced and the development and access to it can be appropriately located and land instabilitywill beminimised).  Clearingofnativevegetationis minimised. 5.10 Second houses in Rural Policy Areas In Rural PolicyAreas asecondhousemayonlybedevelopedonaparcel ofland,alot or atenement holdingwhere:  the additional house is to provide for a farm manager/caretaker or a relative of theowner/occupier; and  the area of the parcel of land, lot or tenement holding is of sufficient size so that a two lot subdivision could occur under the particular PolicyArea, within which thelandis situated. 30. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS 5.11 Forestry and timber production Forestry and timber production on private land with suitable native or other hardwood species, whether in plantations or in native forests, may be allowed subject to planning permit, provided that all activities including harvesting, roading, regeneration and fire protection are carried out in a manner compatible with the protection and maintenance of landscape values, water and soil resources, and maintenance of the integrityand long term conservationofanySites ofNatural SignificanceorSites ofCultural Significance. Softwoodplantations must beprohibitedwithintheRegion. In order to ensure that native forests and plantations are managed for their timber and other values in a sustainable manner, any proposal to carry out forestry or timber productiononprivatelandmust demonstratethat:  the land contains suitable timber resources of known quantity or it has the potential toberegeneratedwithsuitablenativespecies;  timber harvesting can be carried out without detrimental effects to the area's soils, landscapeandwaterresources andtoits floraandfauna;  appropriate native species (which will not create environmental problems) will be planted and silvicultural and management techniques will be applied to regenerate the harvested areas and to maintain the forest resources in a sustainablemanner;  plantations will only be established on land previously cleared of native vegetationandwhichis currentlybeingusedforagricultureorotherpurposes;  floodplainmanagement areas will beexcluded,and  timber harvesting will be excluded from the land within 30 metres of any watercourse. 5.12 Management of land for forestry and timber production The use or development of land for forestry in native forests, or for afforestation of native hardwood species must be on the basis of a proposal which contains a forest coupe plan, which addresses the matters contained in the Code of Forest Practice for TimberProductionandwhichspecifies:  coupelocationandcuttingareaboundaries;  methods of marking, cutting and removing wood and the estimated volume of woodtoberemoved;  wet weather and seasonal restrictions, and any other periods during which operations will limited;  areas excluded from harvesting to provide for flora and fauna protection under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988, water quality protection, landscape protection,andsignificant sites;  protectionandrehabilitationofsoils;  location, design, construction, maintenance and closure of timber extraction roads; 31. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  siting,useandrehabilitationoflandings, logdumps andsnigtracks;  silvicultural methods andregenerationprocedures tobeapplied;  fireprotectionrestrictions, and  other details or information which may influence the specific conduct of the operation,includingtrafficmovements toandfrom thesite. 5.13 Agroforestry Agroforestry using suitable native timber species and in association with agricultural production, may be allowed and is to be encouraged on land already cleared of native vegetationand/orondegradedandpreviouslyloggedareas needingrehabilitation. 5.14 Landscape protection The protection, maintenance and enhancement of landscapes and landscape character in Rural PolicyAreas must beensured. Inconsideringorcarryingout anyuses anddevelopments, it must beensuredthat:  visual and environmental values of landscapes in Rural Policy Areas are fully recognised,protectedandwherenecessaryenhanced;  all development is located so that it avoids prominent ridgelines, hill tops and visuallyexposedvalleys;  consideration is given to the use of non reflective surfaces or screen planting, and that the development is adequately set back from road frontages and access ways;  all development is designed and sited in a manner complementaryto its location, andcompatiblewithmaintenanceofcharacteroftheRural PolicyAreas;  all roads and access tracks are located, designed, constructed and landscaped in the manner compatible with maintenance of landscape values and character, and minimisationofsoil erosion;  all land use and development is managedandcontrolledtomaintainandenhance the visual amenity and the quality along the main roads and other access routes, andthat ribbondevelopment alongtheroads is strictlycontrolled,and  all use and development of land within landscapes "Classified" and "Recorded" by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria) will be carried out in a manner that is compatible with protection, maintenance and, where possible, enhancement of thelandscapecharacteroftheseareas. Councils are encouraged to develop guidelines and provide advisory services for the design and siting of houses, buildings and other works, in order to encourage sensitive approaches tolandscapeprotection. 5.15 Protection of agricultural practices: The maintenance and enhancement of agricultural practices in Rural Policy areas must be encouraged. To enable the longterm achievement of these aims, appropriate farming 32. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS practices necessary for successful operation of agricultural activities should be recognised.Suchpractices shouldhaveregardto:  Department ofAgricultureguidelines andrecommendations;  the diversityof agricultural pursuits and the uncertaintyof climatic conditions in theRegion;  thechangingtechnologyandconsumerpreferences foragricultural products;  theprimarypurposes oftheRural PolicyAreas; and  themaintenanceofenvironmental values. 5.16 Subdivision policies for Rural Policy Areas Subdivision in Rural Policy Areas must be managed in accordance with the primary purposeforeachPolicyAreaandtheregional goal andobjectives. Within Rural Policy Areas subdivision may be allowed and planning schemes may provide for a variety of subdivision techniques, including minimum lot controls, a densitycontrol andadensitymatrix technique. 5.17 Subdivision Yields The yield of lots, and the maximum and minimum lot sizes (for other than density matrix subdivisions)must conform tothefollowingtable: Maximum& PolicyArea Averagelotyield Minimumlotsizes IntensiveAgriculture1 1lottoeach 8ha 6ha-14ha ofsitearea IntensiveAgriculture2 1lottoeach 20ha 15ha-35ha ofsitearea Rural 1 1lottoeach 25ha 18ha-44ha ofsitearea Rural 2 1lottoeach 40ha 30ha-70ha ofsitearea Rural Landscape1 1lottoeach 8ha 6ha-14ha ofsitearea Rural Landscape2 1lottoeach 16ha 12ha-28ha ofsitearea Rural Conservation 1lottoeach 40ha 30ha-70ha ofsitearea Despitetheseprovisions, planningapproval maybegrantedforasubdivisionwhere:  The lot to be created is required for apublicuseorpublicpurpose,bytheCrown, apublicauthorityoraCouncil.  The purpose of the subdivision is to re-align a common boundary between two existing lots, where no additional lots will be created and where the re-alignment does not allow an increase in the number of houses that could be constructed on 33. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS the land beyond that permitted by the planning scheme prior to the subdivision takingplace.  The land is affected by Special Study Area or Restructure provisions and the subdivisionis inaccordancewiththerequirements ofthoseprovisions  The subdivision is for a multi-dwelling, shop, office, factoryor other similar use, whichis inaccordancewithaplanningscheme.  The subdivision is for the excision of a lot of between 0.8 ha and 1.2 ha (exclusive of an access driveway of not more than 3 metres in width) from land which:  Contains two houses which have lawfully been established and neither of the houses were established as dwellings ancillaryto an existinghouse on thelandsuchas a‘dependent relativeunit’oran‘ancillarydwelling’;  Eachnewlot contains aoneoftheestablishedhouses. Any lot created under this provision must not be further subdivided except in accordance with the maximum lot yield provisions, or for the realignment of a common boundary, or the lot to be created is required for a public purpose bythe Crown,apublicauthorityoraCouncil,as allowedbypolicy5.17. 5.18 Density matrix subdivision Planning schemes may provide for a density matrix subdivision technique, only within theRural 1,Rural 2andRural Landscape2PolicyAreas. Where a densitymatrix provision is to be provided, it must specifythat there be a single primary lot, with the remaining lots being within the range of 3 hectares to 5 hectares. The further subdivision of the primary lot in a density matrix subdivision must be prohibitedbytheplanningscheme. The creation of the primary lot in a density matrix subdivision must cover the land which is most suitable for agricultural uses or which has the most significant environmental values, and the small lots created must be located to minimise intrusion intothelandscapeandwhereappropriate,begroupedtoavoidlineardevelopment. 5.19 Subdivision management Any lot created by subdivision, (excluding lots created to provide for a Council, Public Authority or Government purpose) must comprise land which has at least 40% of its areathat:  is not subject toslopes of20%orgreater;  is not withinafloodplainmanagement area;  if it is subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybeusedforcontrolled andlimiteddevelopment. The subdivision of land must only be allowed when the size, shape and layout of proposedlots arecompatiblewith: 34. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  the terrain characteristics of the site slope, watercourses, soil types and vegetation;  acontinuingpotential foranagricultural usetheland;  thephysical landscapecharacteristics anduseofadjacent land;  the long term conservation of any Sites of Natural Significance and/or Sites of Cultural Significanceaffectingtheland; and  the capacity of any land subject to land instability to be reasonably and safely usedforcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. In any subdivision, access roads and development envelopes be located so that minimum earthworks are required, dominant landscape features such as ridgelines are free of development, and the maintenance of Sites of Natural Significance and Sites of Cultural Significanceis not jeopardised. 5.20 Other policies applying to Rural Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  PublicLand  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region 35. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - RURALPOLICYAREAS  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan 35a