REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SPECIALSTUDYAREAS 11. SPECIAL STUDY AREAS 11.01 Regional Overview The Region contains a number of ‘old and inappropriate’ subdivisions in Township, Landscape Living and Rural Policy Areas. These small lot subdivisions were generally created early this century and are a problem, particularly in the Dandenong Ranges and parts oftheUpperYarraValley. In many cases these ‘old and inappropriate’ subdivisions are located in environmentally sensitive areas and are especially inappropriate if they are also in an area prone to flooding, with high fire hazards, prone to soil erosion or in a situation where pollution and landscape degradation may result from development or where provision of social andphysical services wouldbetoocostlyornot feasible. Investigations into many of these problems has resulted in various public acquisition and restructure programs being introduced. These programs are designed to jointly satisfy the environmental impact question, and also to help landowners facing difficulties withtheseproblem subdivisions. To a large extent, the implementation of restructure and management programs has been carried out. Further work is required in some areas to arrive at appropriate solutions. The Regional Strategy Plan recognises this need by maintaining the identification of these areas, as Special StudyAreas. The policies now in place will ensure the on-going implementation of the Special StudyAreas previouslyidentified and will provideforthe resolution of further areas that may be identified as needing similar management programs. 11.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose for the Special Study Area policies is to ensure that potentially serious environmental and social impacts resulting from inappropriate subdivision development areovercome. 11.03 Regional Policies Subdivision restructure programs, as identified in local sections of planning schemes should be continued. Further studies should be undertaken and solutions developed for those subdivisions where serious problems may still exist or may emerge, or where investigatorystudies havenot yet takenplace. Additional subdivision restructure programs should be initiated where it can be demonstrated that serious environmental and/or social detriment will occur through the development ofanareainits present subdividedform. Additional subdivision restructure programs may be identified where groups of small lots (usually 0.4 hectares or less) exist and where one or more of the following are present: 51. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - SPECIALSTUDYAREAS  services such as road, water supply and sewerage cannot be provided without excessive cost and where the provision of services would have serious detrimental environmental implications;  any development will cause serious environmental damage irrespective of the degreeofservicing;  accessibility is poor and the lots are in an isolated location with regard to communityfacilities andotherservices;  thedangerfrom wildfireis acute;  development of the land would cause a detrimental visual impact on the landscapecharacterofthearea;  development will jeopardise the maintenance or enhancement of a Site of Natural SignificanceoraSiteofCultural Significance; and  wheredevelopment oftheareawouldcausesignificant trafficproblems. 52.