REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - HUMANSERVICES 12. HUMAN SERVICES 12.01 Introduction The delivery of human services in the Upper Yarra and Dandenong Ranges Region needs tobeconsideredwithinthecontext of:  Changes inthecompositionandcharacteristics oftheRegion’s population.  The necessityfor coordinated planningto ensure that services are delivered toall sectors ofthepopulationwhenandwheretheyareneeded.  The goals of providing more equitable access to opportunities, services and facilities forall members ofthecommunity.  Access to economic resources, power, essential goods and services, guaranteed equal rights and expanded opportunities for residents to participate in decision- making. 12.02 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the Human Services Policy is to ensure that all current and future land use planning decisions are considered in relation to the impact they may have on the usage of existing human services and facilities and whether such decisions will necessitatetheprovisionofadditional services andfacilities. The following factors need to be considered when future planning decisions are being made.  access toexistingfacilities andservices;  access toadditional facilities andservices that mayarisefrom suchdecisions;  cost oftheprovisionofservices andfacilities;  responsibilityforfunding,management andprovisionofservices andfacilities;  the timing of provision of services and facilities, including pre-planning in order for Government agencies and Councils to include estimates in their budget negotiations;  use of flexible and innovative designs (such as services provided on a mobile or sessional basis as outreach from selected major service centres within the Region)toaccommodateexistingandchangingcommunityneeds;  the possibility of cost-sharing arrangements or joint planning of facilities and services withneighbouringmunicipalities and/orRegions, and  clusteringandmultipleuseoffacilities andservices, whereappropriate. Councils, appropriate Government Departments and community service bodies are encouraged to work together in a cooperative and coordinated manner, in order to implement this policy. In particular, and in relation to any land use and development planning decision with significant implications for the availability and delivery of facilities andservices, it shouldbeensuredthat: 53. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - HUMANSERVICES  up to date information on the nature, location and current usage of services and facilities relevant tothat decisionis available;  deficiencies of facilities andservices fortheexistingandpotential populationare identifiedandadequatelyaddressed;  anexaminationofaccessibilityofexistingservices andfacilities is carriedout;  appropriate measures are included in the planning decision, where appropriate, toimproveaccessibilitywheredeficiencies havebeenidentified; and  consideration is given to the most appropriate method of service delivery, including the possibility of innovative approaches to meeting existing or anticipateddemand. 54.