REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES 13. ACTIVITY CENTRES 13.01 Regional Overview The intended role of the Region's activity centres, which refer generally to what people call their ‘shopping’ and ‘community’ centres, is to provide an appropriate range of retail and commercial services - together with community and social facilities - to meet the needs of residents and visitors. This role is supported by State Government policies for metropolitan ‘activity’ centres, which encourage the clustering and integrated planning of activities in preferred centres. Major activity centres in the northern sector of the Region include Lilydale, Chirnside Park. These centres are augmented by other larger centres, including Kilsyth, Mooroolbark, Mt. Evelyn, Seville, Yarra Junction, Warburton, Healesville and Yarra Glen. The main centres in the southern sector are Belgrave, Monbulk and Upwey, most of which are on Burwood Highway. There is no major activity centre comparable to Lilydale or Chirnside Park within the southern sector. The policies of the Regional Strategy Plan provide a flexible and goal-oriented approach to activity centre planning. They have been developed in recognition of a number of premises, including:  that despite the growth in population and associated demand for services, the previously anticipated level of growth in retail and commercial floorspace has not occurred, resulting in an under supply in some locations;  the growth of significant ‘regional’ shopping centres outside the Region, especially at Ringwood, Croydon and Knox City, has been to some extent based on the population growth within the Region;  changes in employment location preferences and settlement patterns and the need to decrease the high level of escape retail spending that currently leaks from the Region; and  the need to provide more adequately for the Region's population growth, and to plan more effectively for commercial centre development within the Region. 55. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES Bulky goods retailing is occurring in the western parts of the Region. Most of the floorspace is currently located in industrial zones. Bulky goods retailing opportunities should be provided in appropriate locations, preferably within the western part of the Region. 13.02 Primary Purpose To maintain a network of vibrant activity centres that collectively offer a wide and equitably distributed range of commercial services, employment opportunities, and community infrastructure. 13.03 Objectives for all Commercial Centres  Encourage retail, commercial, entertainment, community and other intensive employment generating activities to locate within established activity centres.  Ensure that activity centres are well designed places where people can enjoy shopping, doing business and participating in community activities.  Manage future use and development within activity centres that recognise and strengthen the role of the centre as set out in the Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table.  Facilitate within activity centres, a diverse mix of land uses that contribute to net community benefit and do not adversely affect the level of service provided by other centres in the activity centre network.  Promote additional housing within and adjoining activity centres.  Ensure services are clustered and provided in a convenient location which is accessible to many by travel on foot, bicycle or improved public transport.  For those activity centres expected to experience further significant development pressure, prepare structure plans to set strategic directions for future land use, development and the provision of supporting infrastructure. 13.04 Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table Activity Centre Type Role Major Activity Centres These centres provide a large, diverse and intensive mix of retail, commercial, entertainment, cultural and other uses. Chirnside Park and Lilydale They have strong public transport links, serve a large regional-sized catchment, and are priority locations for future private and public sector development and more diverse residential development. Large Neighbourhood Activity Centres Smaller in floorspace terms than Major Activities Centres, these centres have a retail mix that is focussed on Belgrave, Healesville, Kilsyth, convenience and grocery shopping. They also provide a Monbulk, Mooroolbark, Mount Evelyn, range of community services to the surrounding Seville, Yarra Glen, Yarra Junction communities. Some of these centres, which serve a catchment that extends 56. REGIONAL STRATEGY PLAN - COMMERCIAL CENTRES Activity Centre Type Role into the rural hinterland, perform a significant role in the provision of community and civic services, with some also providing a range of facilities and services for tourists. Small Neighbourhood Activity Centres These centres have a more limited role in providing convenience retailing and community facilities for an Coldstream, Montrose, Mount immediate surrounding catchment. Dandenong, Olinda, Sassafras, Tecoma., Upwey, Wandin North, Warburton, Woori Yallock. Local Activity Centres Local Activity Centres consist of a small group of shops that typically serve a local walk-in catchment, and provide for the Examples include: daily convenience and ‘top up’ needs of local residents and Colby Drive - Belgrave South, Monbulk passing motorists. Road Silvan and Switchback Road - Chirnside Park Some of these centres contain a limited number of community facilities and other uses. Proposals for use and development of land should be consistent with and support the identified role for the relevant activity centre as set out in the Yarra Ranges Activity Centre Hierarchy Table. 57.