REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS 4. LANDSCAPE LIVING POLICY AREAS 4.01 Regional Overview The major concentrations of the land in these Policy Areas are in the Dandenong Ranges, around the township of Healesville and in a few areas along the Warburton Highway. They contain two broad categories of land. The first is the land which is already substantially subdivided and used predominantly for residential purposes, with some hobby farming activities. The second includes land which has been selected in strategic locations to provide a buffer between the urban areas of Lilydale and adjoining rural land, and to prevent further intrusion of incompatible activities into the rural environment. Landscape Living Policies have been applied to four policy areas, which comprise the land with similar physical and environmental characteristics, with a common element beinglowdensityresidential landuse. Melbourne2030Urban Growth Boundary The State Government’s strategy for metropolitan Melbourne, “Melbourne 2030” was released on the 8 October 2002. The Strategycontains directions and policies that apply an Urban Growth Boundary to metropolitan Melbourne and rural townships, including urban areas within the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges region, to prevent theencroachment ofurbandevelopment intoGreenWedgeareas. 4.02 Regional Goals Theregional goals fortheLandscapeLivingPolicyAreas areto:  Ensure that land within this zone remains committed to single detached housing as theprimaryfunctionofthesepolicyareas.  Minimise adverse visual and other impacts associated with the use and development oflandwithinthesepolicyareas.  Exclude commercial uses from the policy areas, other than those which can be appropriately integrated into the residential and environmentally sensitive nature ofthearea.  Ensure that uses and development which generate waste provide the means to treat and dispose of those wastes in a manner that has regard to recycling and to theirimpacts onthelandandtheareagenerally.  Providetheopportunityforlimitedunobtrusivetourist accommodation.  Maintain the distinct non-commercial areas between townships given the importance of retaining well defined and compact townships throughout the Shire.  Require the long term restructuring of land holdings within some of the existing subdivisions, where these areas are inappropriately subdivided having regard for local environmental,servicingandlandscapeconsiderations. 16. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  Ensure that all development has regard to the natural features of the land and is properly designed and sited in recognition of such factors as land slope, vegetationcharacteristics andotherlocal amenityconsiderations.  Ensure that development has regard to the built form and is designed and sited to maintain overall design consistency with surrounding development and without detriment tothelocal environment.  Provide for the long term protection and enhancement of remnant vegetation, particularlySites ofBotanical orZoological Significance.  Provide, in appropriate locations, for a buffer between urban development and the broadscale agricultural areas of the Region, particularly in the vicinity of Lilydale. 4.03 Landscape Living Policy Areas - Description and Primary Purposes Thelocationandextent ofLandscapeLivingPolicyAreas is shownon Map Series 1. Within the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges region, the Urban Growth Boundary generally conforms to the Township Policy Areas in the Upper Yarra Valley and Dandenong Ranges Regional Strategy Plan. The Urban Growth Boundary has also been applied to some Landscape Living Policy Areas that have urban characteristics. This includes the settlements of Wesburn, Millgrove and Launching Place. The inclusion of these areas within the Urban Growth Boundary recognises their urban characteristics but does not imply that their zoning should change under the Yarra Ranges PlanningScheme. Landscape Living 1 Policy Area Overview Most of the land in Landscape Living 1 Policy Area is in the Dandenong Ranges and in scattered localities in the southern foothills, generally following the Belgrave- Gembrookcorridor. The area is used predominantlyfor low-densityresidential living, recreation and tourism activities, together with associated retail and commercial uses, usually found in the hamlets scattered along the Mt. Dandenong Ridge. Generally, the land has alreadybeen subdivided, into lots varying in size from 0.1 hectare ‘suburban’ type lots, to lots of about 2hectares andlarger. The landscape of the Landscape Living Policy Areas is highly significant, with one of the important attributes beingthe presence of indigenous and exotic vegetation, with tall mountain ash trees being the major feature. Many residential properties, particularly those located on larger lots have well established and maintained gardens, which together with a "hills" and bushland environment makes this area one of the most desiredlow-densitylivinglocations withintheRegion. Primary purpose The primary purpose for the Landscape Living 1 Policy Areas is to maintain and where possible enhance indigenous and significant exotic vegetation and native fauna, special 17. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS landscape characteristics and the existing low density residential character, roads and otherinfrastructure. Landscape Living 2 Policy Area Overview These areas have been substantially or even completely subdivided and built upon, and have characteristics and densities similar to Township Policy Areas. They are excluded from Township PolicyAreas because of their limited size (which restricts their abilityto support township type services),and their separation or isolation from Township Policy Areas. This helps to avoid any expectations of a more complete range of services or of furtherurbanexpansionwhicha"Township"designationmight suggest. In these areas, any undeveloped land may be treated as Special Study Areas, to allow subdivision and/or management provisions which would have regard to their special circumstances. Primary purpose The primary purpose for the Landscape Living 2 Policy Areas is to maintain and where possible enhance the existing environment and landscape character of residential development. Landscape Living 3 Policy Areas Overview Most of the land in the Landscape Living 3 PolicyAreas is in Mt. Evelyn and the Narre WarrenEast area. The Policy Area generally contains land which is already substantially subdivided and used for residential purposes in a rural setting. The subdivision density is substantially lower than conventional urban areas, and residential use is usuallyassociated with small scale, part time, agriculture. The policyarea is generallyconfined to poorer agricultural land. Primary purpose The primarypurpose for the Landscape Living 3 PolicyAreas is to provide an attractive and low density living environment and to maintain and enhance the quality of its landscapeandenvironmental values andwatercourses. Landscape Living Buffer Policy Area Overview The Landscape Living Buffer Policy Areas provide a buffer between urban and rural areas to the north and west of Lilydale, to protect farming activities from incompatible urban land uses and prevent urban expansion into rural areas of the Yarra Valley. The land within this Policy Area is generally cleared of vegetation, with few constraints to low-densityresidential development. 18. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS Primary purpose The primary purpose of the Landscape Living Buffer Policy Area is to provide an attractive and well serviced rural-residential buffer between urban and rural land use in theLilydaleareaandtoprevent furtherintrusionofurbandevelopment intorural areas. Policies for Land Use and Management in Landscape Living Policy Areas 4.04 Land use Land uses must be compatible with the regional goals for Landscape Living Policy Areas andtheprimarypurposeforeachLandscapeLivingPolicyArea. 4.05 Construction of buildings The construction of buildings, including houses and farm buildings, in Landscape Living Policy Areas must be carried out in a manner compatible with the maintenance and protection of landscape character, water resources, indigenous and significant exotic flora, indigenous fauna, and the existing residential character, as providing acceptable standards ofresidential health,safetyandamenity. Development within Landscape Living Policy Areas may only occur on land (within a designateddevelopment envelope)which:  is not subject to excessive slopes (that is a slope greater than 20%), without proper regard being given to appropriate measures to ensure that soil erosion does not occur;  is not within a floodplain management area (except as allowed under Policy 10.02);  if subject to land instability, can reasonablyand safelybe used for controlled and limiteddevelopment;  is not within an area identified as having a high risk from wildfire, unless it has been shown that appropriate measures have been undertaken, to provide an acceptablelevel ofprotectiontothebuildingfrom wildfirerisk;  is of sufficient size, should there be no reticulated sewerage to which the building can be connected, to enable proper on-site treatment of all wastes generated in the building and the disposal on-site of the effluent from the treatment;  enables all buildings and their waste treatment and effluent disposal systems to be located at least 30 metres from any watercourse to avoid any adverse effects on water quality and streamside vegetation (this distance may be reduced to 10 metres where the land is too small to provide a 30 metre setback and the responsible authority is satisfied that the development and anywaste water from it will not adverselyeffect thewatercourse); (Am 75)  enables proper consideration to be given to the type of construction (external materials in particular) andthelocationofthebuildings andtheirancillaryworks (such as driveways and access roads), in a manner that avoids intrusion into the 19. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS surrounding landscape, and which provides opportunities for protecting remnant indigenous vegetationandnatural habitat; and  demonstrates that any house or building requiring utility services are able to be provided with such services in a manner that will not have an adverse impact on theenvironment orlandscapeofthearea. Except for the provision of a dependent relative unit, onlyone house maybe allowed on anylot ortenement holding(whereit applies). 20. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS 4.06 Tenement provisions Within Landscape Living 1 Policy Areas that are also within the Mt Dandenong Ridge Area, a tenement holding control must be introduced (or maintained) so that development of a house will only occur on a lot or parcel of land which satisfies one of thefollowing.Theland:  is part ofatenement holdingandis inexcess of0.4ha.inarea;  was created in accordance with an approved Planning Scheme or Interim Development Order;  consists of the consolidation of all parcels and/or lots within a tenement holding; or  is a lot which existed as a separate tenement holding on the date specified in the relevant planningscheme; 4.07 Tenement anomaly provisions Despite the requirement for tenement provisions, a planning scheme may modify the tenement provisions as theyapplytospecificlots, providedthat it is demonstratedthat:  The modification will not prejudicetheprimarypurposeofthepolicyareawithin which the lots occur and that the wider objectives of tenement controls for the policy area are protected from incremental erosion and are maintained as a legitimate means of protecting the areas identified from inappropriate development.  Services such as constructed roads, reticulated water supply and reticulated sewerage are available, without additional substantial costs to Council and servicing authorities and the provision of these and other utility services will haveminimal impact ontheenvironment orlandscapeofthearea.  Where reticulated sewerage is not available, the site must be of sufficient size to enableproperon-sitetreatment anddisposal ofall wastes.  Where the land is an area identified as having a high risk of wildfire hazard, appropriate building design measures will be required to be undertaken to provideanacceptablelevel ofprotection.  Development will not jeopardise the maintenance of any Site of Natural SignificanceorSiteofCultural significance.  There will be no detriment to the ecology of any stream or watercourse on or nearthesite,byvirtueoftheadditional development occurring.  The additional development can be considered to be infill in an area which is substantiallybuilt up.  The land is not subject to constraints to development, such as land instability, land liable to flooding or land with slopes of 20% or greater (unless where slopes are greater than 20%, information has been provided that demonstrates that soil erosion will be minimised, landscape characteristics are protected or enhanced and the development and access to it can be appropriately located and land instabilitywill beminimised). 21. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  Clearingofnativevegetationis minimised. 4.08 Landscape protection The protection, maintenance and enhancement of landscapes and landscape character in LandscapeLivingPolicyAreas must beensured. In the consideration, or carrying out, of any uses and developments, it must be ensured that:  visual and environmental values of landscapes in Landscape LivingPolicyAreas arefullyrecognised,protectedandwherenecessaryenhanced;  all development is located so that it avoids prominent ridgelines, hill tops and visuallyexposedvalleys;  consideration is given to the use of non reflective surfaces or screen planting, and that the development is adequately set back from road frontages and access ways;  all development is designed and sited in a manner complementaryto its location, and compatible with maintenance of character of the Landscape Living Policy Areas;  all roads and access tracks are located, designed, constructed and landscaped in the manner compatible with maintenance of landscape values and character, and minimisationofsoil erosion;  all land use and development is managedandcontrolledtomaintainandenhance the visual amenity and the quality along the main roads and other access routes, andthat ribbondevelopment alongtheroads is strictlycontrolled,and  all use and development of land within landscapes "Classified" and "Recorded" by the National Trust of Australia (Victoria) as delineated by Map Series 10, must be carried out in a manner that is compatible with protection, maintenance and,wherepossible,enhancement ofthelandscapecharacteroftheseareas. 4.09 Subdivision policies for Landscape Living Policy Areas Subdivision in Landscape Living Policy Areas must be managed in accordance with the PrimaryPurposeforeachPolicyArea. Within Landscape Living Policy Areas, subdivision may be allowed and planning schemes may provide for a variety of subdivision techniques, including minimum lot controls andadensitycontrol. 22. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS Subdivision yields The average yield of lots, and the maximum and minimum lot sizes, must conform to thefollowingtable: Minimum& PolicyArea Averagelotyield Maximumlotsizes 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving1 1ha-3ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving2 1ha-3ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 4ha LandscapeLiving3 3ha-7ha ofsitearea 1lottoeach 2ha LandscapeLiving(Buffer) 1ha-3ha ofsitearea Despitetheseprovisions, planningapproval maybegrantedforasubdivisionwhere:  The lot to be created is required for a public use or purpose by the Crown, a publicauthorityoraCouncil.  The purpose of the subdivision is to re-align a common boundary between two existing lots, where no additional lots will be created and where the re- alignment does not allow an increase in the number of houses that could be constructed on the land beyond that permitted by the planning scheme prior to thesubdivisiontakingplace.  The land is affected by Special Study Area or Restructure provisions and the subdivisionis inaccordancewiththerequirements ofthoseprovisions  The subdivision is for a multi-dwelling, shop, office, factory or other similar use,whichis inaccordancewithaplanningscheme. Subdivision management Any lot created by subdivision, (excluding lots created to provide for a Council, Public Authority or Government purpose) must comprise land which has at least 40% of its areathat is:  not subject toslopes of20%orgreater;  not withinafloodplainmanagement area; or  not subject to land instability, except where it can reasonably and safely be used forcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. The subdivision of land must only be allowed when the size, shape and layout of proposedlots arecompatiblewith:  the terrain characteristics of the site slope, watercourses, soil types and vegetation;  acontinuingpotential foranagricultural usetheland,whereappropriate;  thephysical landscapecharacteristics anduseofadjacent land; 23. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - LANDSCAPELIVINGPOLICYAREAS  the retention of remnant native vegetation and the long term conservation of anySites of Natural Significance and/or Sites of Cultural Significance affecting theland; and  the capacity of any land subject to land instability to be reasonably and safely usedforcontrolledandlimiteddevelopment. In any subdivision, access roads and development envelopes must be located so that minimum earthworks are required, dominant landscape features such as ridgelines are free of development, and the maintenance of Sites of Natural Significance and Sites of Cultural Significanceis not jeopardised 4.10 Other policies applying to Landscape Living Policy Areas In addition to the policies contained within this chapter, Township Policy Areas may also beaffectedbypolicies applyingto:  PublicLand  Management ofSites ofNatural SignificanceandofNativeVegetation  Management ofSites ofCultural Significance  PuffingBillyRailwayScenicCorridor  FloodplainManagement Areas; Special StudyAreas  HumanServices  Commercial Centres  ManufacturingandIndustry  Extractiveindustry,Mining&Soil Removal  RecreationandTourism  WaterResources  ServiceNetworks  Transport  FireManagement;  ScheduleOne-StatePlanningPolicies fortheRegion  Schedule Five - List of Environmental Weeds for the Upper Yarra Valley & DandenongRanges Region  Schedule Six - Exemptions to the policies or provisions under the Regional StrategyPlan. 24.