REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES 17. WATER RESOURCES 17.01 Regional Overview A major part of the Region, is used for water harvesting purposes. The Yarra River System upstream of YeringGorge and parts of Thomson Forest areusedas watersupply catchments fortheMelbournemetropolitanarea,MorningtonPeninsulaandtheRegion. Maintenance of high water quality for domestic and other beneficial uses and maintenance of environmental values are primary objectives, and the policies in this section have been developed specifically to achieve that objective. As most of the Region is used as a catchment for Melbourne's water supply the policies reflect this importance. The policies of the Regional Strategy Plan have been prepared on the basis of a total catchment approach to water resource conservation. Policies in this section concentrate on the waterways and adjacent lands and on issues specifically related to water harvesting. River systems, including floodplains, are of particular significance because of their role in transferring water in times of flood, the habitat they provide for flora and fauna, and the recreational opportunities they offer. The Yarra River and its tributary streams and creeks arewidelyrecognisedas ariversystem withspecial values. Policies for Water Resources and the Yarra River System are included under the followingheadings, andrelatetoMapSeries 4:  WaterHarvestingPolicies,whichdesignatethelandareas forwaterharvesting;  Water Quality Policies, which indicate the standards for water quality objectives and specifylandusepractices conducivetomaintenanceofhighwater quality;  Water Supply Policies, which specify the priorities for reticulated water supply systems; and  River and Stream Management Policies, which propose co-ordinated approaches for stream management generally and for the Yarra River and its tributaries inparticular. 17.02 Water Resources Goals Theregional goals forthewaterresourcepolicies areto:  ensure that the forested catchments used for water production continue to be usedsolelyorprimarilyforthis purposeandmaintainthis potential;  ensure that all local water supply catchments identified in Map 4 continue to be usedsolelyorprimarilyforthis purposeandmaintainthis potential;  ensure that the catchment of the Yarra River above Yering Gorge retains the potential forwatercollectionforpotablepurposes; 76. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES  ensure that water catchments outside the Yarra River catchment retain the potential toharvest watersuitableforvarious defineduses;  achieve the water quality objectives as specified by State Environment ProtectionPolicies;  protect, as far as possible, existing water quality and yield in those catchments subject tochanges inlanduseorlandmanagement;  minimise harmful environmental effects when the collection, harvesting, transportingandusingofwateris undertaken; and  promote the use of off-stream water storages in preference to on-stream storages in order to maintain stream flows and to reduce environmental impact on flora andin-stream fauna. Water Harvesting 17.03 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the water harvesting policies is to maintain the opportunity for high water quality harvesting for domestic and other beneficial uses from the Yarra Riverandothercatchments withintheRegion. 17.04 Melbourne Water Catchments All catchments, storages, diversion, and transfer works under the control of Melbourne Water except for those areas already used and managed by Melbourne Water, may continuetobeusedandmanagedsolelyforwaterharvestingandproductionpurposes. Catchment management measures undertaken by Melbourne Water should ensure that conservation and environmental values of these catchments are recognised and protected. Any expansion of recreational activities, particularly at Sugarloaf Reservoir, must be carefullymonitored byMelbourne Water, in order to protect both the catchment and the surroundingenvironment. 17.05 Local Catchments All local water supply catchments may continue to be used for water harvesting purposes, as required. On the advice of the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, planning authorities and Melbourne Water must carefully control uses and activities within local catchments, which may have detrimental effects on water quality andyields. Water Quality 17.06 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the water quality policies is to ensure that all land uses are managed in a manner compatible with water quality objectives as determined by the Government inStateEnvironment ProtectionPolicies. 77. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES 17.07 Regional Policy All land uses and development of Public and private land must be managed so as to maintain water quality objectives for the Region as determined by the Government in StateEnvironment ProtectionPolicies. 17.08 Timber harvesting in closed catchments Timber may only be harvested in Melbourne Water's closed catchments as a management tool for maintenance of water yields and/or quality, as part of forest hydrologyexperiments ortosalvagefiredamagedtimber. 17.09 Land use management All land use and development within the Yarra River catchment upstream of Yering Gorge must be carried out in accordance with the need to maintain and improve water qualityandyields forpotablepurposes. In addition to the specific land use controls and provisions contained in other policies of the Regional Strategy Plan, Government Departments, Public Authorities, Councils and planningauthorities must ensurethe:  containment ofurbangrowth;  provision of appropriate waste water management facilities to all residential, commercial andindustrial development;  provision for special policy areas along significant watercourses, where appropriate, and the protection of all watercourses and their environs against inappropriateuse;  promotion of good agricultural resource management techniques on rural lands, in order to protect the soil and water resources, including attention to the responsible use and application of fertilisers and biocides, cultivation techniques andtherecyclingofwastewater;  delineation, where appropriate, of land liable to flooding and specification of suitablelanduses;  maintenance of adequate stream flow to ensure protection of the biota and the aestheticqualityoftheYarraRiverandstream system;  retention of riparian vegetation and the protection of the aquatic environment, andappropriaterevegetationoftheseareas;  sympathetic design of buildings, roads and other infrastructures, the employment of sensitive development practices to minimise run-off and the prompt revegetation and stabilisation of disturbed surfaces, in order to minimise run-off anderosion; and  revegetation with appropriate native species of denuded and degraded stream banks, andenhancement oftheexistingnativevegetationalongwatercourses. 78. REGIONALSTRATEGYPLAN - WATERRESOURCES Water Supply 17.10 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of thewatersupplypolicies is toensurecontinuationofsupplyof highqualitydomesticwaterfortheMelbournemetropolitanareaandtheRegion. 17.11 Water Reticulation Investment in new or improved reticulated water supply systems must be directed to serve Township Policy Areas, Landscape Living Policy Areas and designated Special Study Areas and must be co-ordinated with the provision of waste water management facilities andmust recognisetheneedforfirefightingpurposes. River Management 17.12 Primary Purpose The primary purpose of the river and stream management policies is to provide for co-ordinated multi-purpose management of each of the stream systems in the Region, to ensureefficient useofresources andtoprotect theriparianenvironment. 17.13 Coordination policy The Yarra River and its tributaries in the Region must be recognised as a single system withmultiplefunctions, andits management must beco-ordinated. Further research into the Yarra River and its tributaries, particularly the Yarra Valley wetlands, including measures for protection and rehabilitation of natural habitats and systems, shouldbeencouraged. 17.14 Multiple use of streams and waterways Other than those waterways in catchments managed by Melbourne Water, all streams and waterways must be managed to retain the potential for multiple use and take account of water harvesting requirements, demands for recreation, environmental protectionandenhancement ofcultural values andlandscapeaesthetics. Government Departments and public authorities responsible for river and catchment management areencouragedto:  liaise and share information to ensure consistent and co-ordinated policies and management for water resources, environmental protection and enhancement, anduseofwaterways; and  recognise that rivers, streams and watercourses within the Region are natural ecosystems, which must be used and managed so as to ensure that their ecological processes, native species and features of scientific, cultural or scenic significanceareprotectedandenhanced. Relevant river and catchment management authorities must be encouraged to implement policies which will ensure the co-ordinated multi-purpose use of rivers and streams withintheRegion,consistent withtheRegional StrategyPlan. 79.